I always said when I was home secretary
and then prime minister, one of the
things I had to do was to learn about
the things that I had to forget
because as a leader very often there are
things you just cannot talk to somebody
else about.
I think you can never 100% relax because
you never quite know when there's going
to be a phone call that you've got to
respond to.
Virtually every day brings tough
moments.
>> Theresa Mary May has been duly elected
to serve as a member for the said
constituency.
Terresa May has served her country
almost all of her life.
>> You ever voting conservative in the
election?
>> No.
>> No. No.
>> Today she's in the House of Lords and
she's co-president of Chattam House, a
century old Londonbased think tank that
seeks to help governments and societies.
>> Her Majesty the Queen has asked me to
form a new government and I accepted.
From 2016 to 2019, she was prime
minister and the leader of the
Conservative Party. [music] She served
as home secretary for 6 years, the
longest term in that role since 1951.
A member of parliament for maiden head
since the late 1990s, [music]
a local borrow counselor before that,
and she started her career working at
the Bank of England.
I first thought about becoming an MP
from about the age of 12. 12 or 13.
>> Why? Um it was about making a
difference. That was the thing that I
could do that would make a difference to
people's lives, improve people's lives.
>> Do you remember the day where you say,
"Right, I'm I'm putting my hat in the
ring."
>> I was a local counselor in uh one of the
London burs. And like many women, I
actually sort of waited for somebody to
tap me on the shoulder and say, "Have
you thought about this?"
>> Why do you say like many women?
>> Well, I think it's one of the
differences [music]
certainly of my generation, probably
still to a certain extent, is that uh
men will often sort of map out, right,
I'm going to be prime minister by the
age of 25, whatever, and here's back of
the envelope. Here's how I'm going to do
it. Whereas women tend to think, have I
got the skills? am I able to do it?
[music] And wait for somebody to say to
them, I think you could.
>> The Labor Party may be about to spend
several months of fighting and tearing
itself apart. The Conservative Party
will be spending those months bringing
this country back together.
>> I had approached my time in Parliament
in a different way. I wasn't one of
those who joined dining clubs or had a
gang around me or kept going into the
bars and was drinking and so forth. I I
thought I was there to do a job. Some
would say, you know, oh, nonsense.
You've got to be, you know, making
friendships here, there, and everywhere.
Um, but actually, I think it's important
that everybody recognizes with clarity
that being a member of parliament is a
job. It's a it's a huge privilege. You
get there because the public has voted
for you. You are there to work for them.
>> Would you describe yourself as an
introvert?
>> Um
I think some might describe me as an
introvert. I don't think about
describing myself as one thing or or
another. But I do think that I'm
somebody who is uh can be comfortable in
their own skin and comfortable on their
own if you like.
Between becoming an MP and becoming home
secretary, I I had spent um 13 years in
opposition and 11 of those in the shadow
cabinet. And then in 2010 when uh the
Conservative Party didn't win an overall
majority, we went into uh a coalition
with the Liberal Democrats. David
Cameron, the prime minister, asked me to
become home secretary. So I had a steep
learning curve.
>> Home secretary is one of the most senior
positions in the UK government
and it involves overseeing national
security,
>> immigration, counterterrorism
and policing
>> and then and then the briefings pile up
>> and [music] you go to the the home
office and the briefings are there
>> and and what was most daunting out of
those briefings? Um I think well the
aspect that uh I hadn't had any real uh
involvement with were the security
issues.
>> What do you think was was the toughest
actually moment in in being home
secretary?
>> One of the real difficulties is dealing
with tragedies when there are terrorist
attacks.
>> The government has said plans to bomb
the London Stock Exchange and a surge in
Islamic State inspired plots were foiled
under Terresa May. Over the course of
her term as home secretary, May had to
respond to the threat [music] of
al-Qaeda and the emergence of ISIS.
>> As home secretary, I dealt with
terrorist incidents and indeed as prime
minister, there had sadly also been some
terrorist incidents.
>> By any measure, this past year has been
exceptional. Five terror attacks and
even more foiled.
>> We cannot and must not pretend that
things can continue as they are.
Ssbury was different [music] in that as
we showed through the evidence we
accumulated, it was another state.
>> Yeah,
>> this was a state deliberately attempting
an assassination of somebody on British
soil.
>> We can confirm that the man and woman
have been exposed to the nerve agent
Novach.
>> I I remember actually a very tough
handshake and stare with you know
President Putin I think in a saka. It's
their first formal meeting since the
Novachok [music]
attack in Ssbury and before they'd even
started talking. The prime minister's
expression said it all. This was not
going to be a cozy chat. As as a leader,
you have to be prepared to meet other
leaders who you don't agree with. And in
this case, the Russian state had tried
to assassinate somebody on British
sword. A British citizen had died. And
so, you know, I was not going to be nice
to him.
>> Message received. Was it received? Well,
I think with Vladimir Putin, um, he
knows what he wants to do and he's not
too concerned about other people's
views.
>> When when do you decide to to put your
name actually in the ring to become
prime minister?
>> The decision was taken had to be taken
quite quickly.
>> We at ITV News are calling this uh as a
leave victory, an extraordinary moment
in British history.
Let June the 23rd go down in our history
AS OUR INDEPENDENCE DAY.
>> After the 2016 Brexit referendum, the
remain side which the Prime Minister
David Cameron had been promoting had
lost. I was not prepared for him to step
down the next day, which he did.
I remember I was in my kitchen at home
and put the television on and he came
out. I will do everything I can as prime
minister to steady the ship over the
coming weeks and months, but I do not
think it would be right for me to try to
be the captain that steers our country
to its next destination.
>> And [music] of course, uh, people start
phoning you and you have to make a a
decision.
>> My pitch is very simple. I'm Theresa May
and I think I'm the best person to be
prime minister.
I decided to go for [music] it because
although I had voted remain and
campaigned for remain I staying in the
European Union I [music] believed very
much in democracy and people had voted
to leave and therefore we should deliver
that in June people voted for change and
a change is going to come
change [applause]
but I wanted to see it being done in a
way which brought the two sides
together. I felt that we needed to
leave, but in a way that the remainers
felt had addressed at least some of
their concerns.
Terresa May held the top job for 3
years.
She was handed a difficult set of cards,
deliver Brexit while keeping parliament
and her party together.
Uh, Prime Minister, reports tonight that
the ERG says there are enough letters to
trigger a no confidence vote on your
leadership.
>> Her leadership was marred [music] by
Brexit paralysis and a poorly judged
2017 snap election gamble that fatally
weakened her authority.
>> Is it time to go, Prime Minister? Will
you still be prime minister in a week?
Mrs. May,
>> Prime Minister, are you confident you
can win?
>> Are you confident, Prime Minister?
[music]
Is it actually the most difficult thing
as leader to know when to step down when
when enough is enough or is it going
through bad days? I I think you well
sometimes the circumstances are sort of
not exactly forced on you but the
circumstances become those where it's
very difficult for you to continue and
that's what I had of course um with when
I couldn't get my Brexit votes deal
through parliament it was clear um that
something had to give in the system if
you like and that was me uh having to to
step down.
>> I will shortly leave the job that it has
been the honor of my life to hold
the second female prime minister, but
certainly not the last.
I do so with no ill will, but with
enormous and enduring gratitude to have
had the opportunity to serve the country
I love.
>> What's your biggest regret actually for
from your time as prime minister? Is
there something that you wish you'd done
differently or not done?
>> I think one of the challenges certainly
that we see here for prime ministers is
that you do have to spend quite a bit of
time on foreign policy on foreign
issues. That's you're representing your
country. [music] That's important. It's
in the national interest. It perhaps
doesn't leave as much time for being
with your colleagues in parliament. Uh,
and I think certainly what was happening
in the Brexit [music] vote was those who
had firm views on either side of the
argument. I I wonder whether if I'd been
able to spend more time with them, we
would have had a different result. I'm
not sure.
>> But what surprised you the most actually
being [music] in charge?
>> It can be difficult to hold fast to your
course uh as things are happening. And
it's not just domestically, it's not
just in parliamentary terms, it's what's
happening internationally as well. Do
you feel like you had enough support
[music] actually back then by your
cabinet and MPs?
>> I had yes I had good support but I had
deliberately because of the Brexit issue
brought together a cabinet of people
from both sides of the argument. I
thought that was important, but it did
mean there were some quite heated
exchanges sometimes
[cheering]
and uh
odor calm Buddhaike the prime minister.
>> Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
>> Do you think another prime minister
could have managed any better at that
time?
>> Now, you're asking me whether I did as
good a job as anybody could have done or
not? I don't think that's for me to say.
I think the one thing I would say that I
probably hadn't realized didn't realize
until later is the extent to which those
who had been very very vehement levers
the Brexiteers
were suspicious of a prime minister who
had voted to remain. And however
strongly I felt about delivering on the
vote of the British people, however
often I said that, I suspect that for
some of them there was always that
suspicion in the back of their mind.
>> Do you ever miss it being prime
minister?
>> You mustn't let yourself miss it too
much otherwise it would uh it would get
to you. You know, you have politics can
be brutal. Life has to move on.
>> You had after you more colorful prime
ministers um that then failed actually
at their task. Did it vindicate, you
know, the the way that you ran the
government?
>> Um, I'm not sure.
I don't you wouldn't use a term like
vindicate. What I would say is I think
that we unfortunately as a conservative
party were seen to have lost our value
of integrity and our economic
competence. [music]
>> [music]
>> In my time, we faced the thunder of war
and the threat of tyrann. Today, you
face another power, artificial
intelligence. It too may decide whether
Britain marches ahead or stumbles
behind. [applause and music]
>> Are there any more flags?
>> Yeah, there.
>> Good to meet you.
>> I do. Good to meet you. [cheering]
>> We need a new approach. A new approach
that delivers a stronger economy and
stronger borders. We owe that to our
children. [applause]
>> We are pessimistic. I don't think
there's any way that we can say that the
economy is looking well.
It is a sort of a scary time for such a
stories because the party has moved more
to the right like 1987 we got we got
crashed so and we're also having a
pressure from from the right this time.
I think we're at a tipping point here.
It could tip into something good. It
could tip into something bad. Um you
know she's she's shifting a bit more
right and I think the Conservative party
needs to shift a bit more right because
we are a right-wing party.
>> I voted for Genrich. I think he's a
great leader. I think he could do great
things for this party, but I think that
[music] Kami, if she plays her cards
right, can do the same.
>> The party has changed immensely and
obviously with the challenge of reform,
uh, a lot of people here are are
genuinely wondering what comes next for
the party and nearly all of my friends
groups are are now reform. It's being
generated a lot by social media, but
also there's an energy there and I would
say a lot of politics is about vibes.
The Conservative Party is over. Over as
a national party, over as the principal
opposition to the left. Reform UK is a
right-wing political party founded by
Nigel Farage, a leading voice in the
Brexit campaign.
Today, Reform UK positions itself as a
populist alternative to the
Conservatives.
The future is scary and that's what
Reformers banked on. That's what they're
using to create this chaos. But it's
basically snake oil.
>> This is the Britain I stand for. If it
is the Britain you stand for, then stand
with me and let's build it together.
[applause]
[music]
>> How do you think chem's doing?
>> I think she's doing well in what is the
most difficult job in politics. People
naturally don't really want to hear from
the leader of the opposition. It's
doubly difficult if you've had a really
bad election result as we did.
>> But especially if you have reform that's
doing so well.
>> Reform makes a lot of noise. Reform has
now is it four or five MPs currently.
>> But in the polls they're
>> they're doing very well in the polls.
>> But the only poll that ever counts is
the general election. That is some years
away.
>> You don't seem to be threatened by Nigel
Farage.
>> There's always a role for a center-right
party and I think that's what the
Conservative party is about. Nigel
Faraj's uh economic policies, frankly,
they're all over the place. It's all
very well doing well in opinion polls,
but when it comes to it, people want to
ask who should be in government.
Critical to that will be the economy.
>> What does it mean being a leader in 2025
to you?
>> I think the world and politics are in a
different place from what they where
they have been over recent more recent
decades. Uh world leaders have a real
responsibility in terms of looking at
the future. It's not just about what is
happening today.
>> But how how difficult is it to lead with
calmness in a world that feels like
chaos.
>> This is why politics has changed because
with everything uh being so
disrupted and unpredictable today, of
course, it's much harder to lead in
those circumstances, but today's world
is moving much faster. People's
reactions have to be faster. And
obviously, as a leader, you can't always
just react. You have to be able to think
about things. You have to be able to
work out what the best answer is. What
is in your national interest? What is in
the wider interest? Do people still do
that?
>> Yes, I think they do. Yes. I just think
it's become harder for them to do it.
>> Why has the public become so cynical
about politics and politicians?
If we're being honest, I think we know
why
trust in politicians in the UK is at or
near an all-time low.
Yet, the people demand to hear from
politicians on almost everything in real
time. [music] And they're expected to
find solutions to non-traditional
problems like climate change
as well as standards of living and
rising costs.
But change is slow,
especially in a democratic system.
>> There's a sense today that a lot of
people feel their children aren't going
to have a better life than they have.
Whereas in past, every generation has
felt the next generation will be better
off. Uh and we have to deal with find a
way to ensure that we get the growth
that that that responds to that. Pressed
by the press, the PM seemed a little
rattled.
>> Nobody is going to have to pay for their
care. Nobody is going to have while they
are alive, nobody is going to have to
lose their family home.
>> Doesn't this show that you are really
weak and wobbly, not strong and stable?
>> How difficult is that? I know you had a
housing tax to actually fund some
longerterm healthcare and didn't go down
too well. I mean again the the the money
is not infinite right there's only a
part of money so you have to take it
from somewhere
>> the the money is not infinite but of
course if you have growth then you're
going to grow the sum of money that
you're able to uh to be dealing with. Um
but governments do have to look
carefully at ensuring that they're
spending their money wisely. Governments
must always remember it's not their
money, it's the taxpayers's money that's
being spent.
The youth don't necessarily in our
societies believe in democracy.
>> It is a worry. It is a significant
worry. And I think it's one of the
challenges for politicians is to deliver
for young people. There's a whole
mixture of things here that has led to
this and including obviously the the
impact social media has had on the rise
of populism. And so today, if you just
shout loudly and say something, I'll do
this tomorrow. Um people are often
desperate to feel that somebody's going
to deliver for them and know well that
maybe is the way to go. Whereas actually
practically being in government, you
don't just deliver by snapping your
fingers.
>> Any law proposed by the prime minister
needs to be debated and approved by both
houses of parliament. the House of
Commons
and the House of Lords.
The houses debate, scrutinize, delay,
and amend or revise bills.
And each proposed law goes through a
staged process in both houses. This
takes weeks, even months.
Only in rare cases, bills are
fasttracked,
like the trade agreement emergency on
the heels of the Brexit deal that was
struck at the last moment in late
December 2020.
Social media makes people feel,
politicians feel, MPs feel, ministers
feel they've got to be talking about
what they're doing the whole time,
putting it out there. Um, and the
trouble with that is it means it focuses
it much more on them rather than on what
the overall good is, what they're trying
to achieve.
>> And and so how does that change the
nature of politics?
>> Well, it I think it is easier for
populism to rise in a world where there
is social media.
In the [music] past, you'd have old Joe
sitting on the end of the bar in the
pub, muttering into his pint of beer,
and nobody took any notice of him
because his views were either too
extreme or too silly, ridiculous. Now,
old Joe mutters on social media, and all
the other old Joe's around the world
respond and suddenly it becomes a
worldview.
And when you get algorithms pushing
people towards the sort of thing they
want to see and have looked at and heard
a lot, then it becomes much more
difficult because people are not seeing
the other arguments. And actually in
life, in politics, in government, very
often you need to be able to mediate to
compromise. And in that absolutist
world, that polarized world, compromise
becomes a dirty word. And it isn't.
>> What do you think the new world order
looks like? Well, at the moment it's I I
think what we need to make sure is that
we don't just move into a world where
power uh strong men and when people
think about it, they will think about it
as strong men uh is the order of the
day. And it's multilateral institutions
that were set up in the 20th century.
They need reform. They need to look at
where we are today and how we can make
sure that we can have that sense of the
[music] value of multilateral work and
find structures in which to to take that
forward.
>> And is there have you ever had imposter
syndrome?
>> Um no except that I think um I think we
women tend always to sort of think a bit
more about
what we're doing and why we're here to
do it in that sense. So, not a sort of
why me,
>> but that makes that makes you a better
leader if you if you question yourself
rather than being I guess bold but
irrational.
>> Well, I think it's important not to just
assume that you're there because of some
entitlement
that you're actually able [music] to do
the uh you know to think about the job
you're doing, what your mission is, what
your goal is. I think that's important.
>> Theresa May, thank you so much for
joining us.